During the enlarged Government session chaired by Head of State Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, Prime Minister Olzhas Bektenov voiced a number of proposals aimed at improving the fiscal system and economic growth.Head of the Government noted that despite some positive results, the current dynamics of economic growth is insufficient. To fully realise the country's industrial potential and increase the number of promising projects it is necessary to form a solid investment capital. However, this is hindered by the insufficient volume of the "development budget": in developed countries it reaches 25 per cent of all government expenditures, while in Kazakhstan it is 8 per cent. Today, only 2 trillion of the nearly 26 trillion tenge national budget is spent on development. The rest is the current budget, a significant part of which is social spending.As a result, spheres that are the basis of economic development remain underfunded: electricity and heat energy, water management, gas transport system, roads, engineering networks and infrastructure. Development institutions are not provided with sufficient liquidity. Such conditions are difficult to reliably ensure high dynamics of GDP growth.In this regard, it is necessary to implement a set of measures to improve the fiscal system. The current tax system not only does not provide the state with the required volume of investment, but is also unfair to entrepreneurs. The main tax burden falls on the labour remuneration fund, i.e. on the cost of production. Even before the goods hit the shelves, the entrepreneur has to pay most of the taxes. To change this situation, the Government is in favour of redistributing taxes from wages to sales. For this purpose it is necessary to increase the VAT rate, at the same time reducing the social tax and mandatory pension payments of the employer. This will increase the competitiveness of domestic enterprises and create the necessary financial reserves for them. Reducing the burden on the payroll will allow businesses to increase employee salaries. Additional tax revenues will be used to stimulate economic growth, advance infrastructure development, and support promising business projects in priority sectors. The resources of the National Fund will be requested exclusively for the construction of large infrastructure projects.In parallel, work will be done to improve the efficiency of public spending and strengthen budgetary discipline.Attention is focused on the permanent growth of subsidy expenditures in all sectors without taking into account their real effect and with weak control on the part of government agencies. Receiving subsidies has become part of the business model of individual companies. Over the last 3 years, 770 projects have seen a rise in cost estimates totalling 2.2 trillion tenge. However, in addition to the objective increase in cost, there are also controversial issues.More than half of the expenditures of the republican and local budgets, more than 18 trillion tenge, are allocated to the social sphere. It is emphasised that the efficiency of these expenditures raises big questions. Nine central and all local executive bodies are administrators of social expenditures, which entails fragmentation and insufficient control over expenditures.Using digital tools, strengthening of control over budget expenditures for social purposes has been initiated. A transparent digital mechanism for financing kindergartens has been introduced in pilot mode in Taraz, Shymkent, Turkestan and Uralsk. By eliminating additions in four cities alone, this saves more than 20 billion tenge per year. This experience is already being implemented in the capital city, and it will be scaled nationwide by the end of this year.The Social Purse is also becoming a tool for strengthening the targeting of state support. It has been used to pay for children's meals and medicines for those in need. Labelling of free medicines has been completed in order to strengthen control.A digital tenge with the function of colouring money has been introduced on a pilot basis, which makes it possible to trace the entire chain of expenditures to the final recipient. Non-primary expenditures of the state apparatus have been reduced, including current expenses, image events and travel payments totalling 410 billion tenge."Work on improving the efficiency of public spending will be strengthened according to the principle of "budget expenditures should be primarily for economic development, social support - only to those in real need". Economic growth should be accompanied by advanced investment in infrastructure. However, excessive state price regulation in the most capital-intensive sectors of the economy hampers this task and reduces investment potential. The government has started a gradual liberalisation of prices for fuel and lubricants and gas, as well as tariffs in the housing and utilities sector and railway transportation. A smooth transition to market pricing will make it possible to attract the necessary investments in these areas and get rid of the risks of a shortage of fuels and lubricants. I would like to emphasise that we will not allow a sharp jump in prices. The adoption of these measures will ensure the necessary dynamics of economic growth and structural changes in the economy," Olzhas Bektenov concluded.Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan Olzhas Bektenov and Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation Mikhail Mishustin held bilateral talks, during which they discussed the implementation of agreements reached between the President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev and Russian President Vladimir Putin to increase the volume of bilateral trade.Plans to expand trade and economic, scientific and technical, cultural and humanitarian cooperation between the countries were considered. Attention is paid to the implementation of tasks to strengthen cooperation in the field of industrial cooperation, agriculture, energy, transport industry, etc. The sides also discussed plans to expand trade, economic, scientific, technical, cultural and humanitarian cooperation between the countries.Russia is one of the main trade partners of Kazakhstan. For 11 months of the last year mutual trade reached $24.2 billion. In order to achieve the agreements of the Heads of State to bring trade turnover to $30 billion, it is important to expand the range of goods supplied. The sides noted the positive results of the implementation of the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Programme for 2021-2025 and outlined the expediency of developing an updated programme for the coming period.The trade turnover of agricultural products at the end of 10 months of 2024 increased by 5% and amounted to more than $3.2 billion.In the field of industrial cooperation, 99 Kazakh-Russian projects worth $18.6 billion have been implemented to date. Prospects for the implementation of new joint projects in Kazakhstan have been considered.Transit traffic through Kazakhstan is developing at a high rate. In this regard, attention was paid to the development of road and railway infrastructure, as well as the opening of new alternative routes in the field of water transport.Prime Minister Olzhas Bektenov held a meeting of the Council of Domestic Entrepreneurs on the development of transport and logistics infrastructure of the Republic of Kazakhstan with the participation of the leadership of sectoral ministries and government organisations.A constructive dialogue was held on the current situation and problems in the field of road, rail, water and air transport. Representatives of business stated about the existing administrative barriers that prevent the infusion of private investment and the implementation of new infrastructure projects in the industry. Proposals were made to improve regulatory norms to improve the business climate in the country.Bakytbek Kadirov, General Director of Konkurent-B LLP, made proposals on attracting private investment in the railway industry. In particular, the construction of new tracks in regions that lack infrastructure but have potential for economic growth. This will help expand infrastructure bottlenecks and ensure the development of territorial connectivity within the country.Prime Minister supported the initiative on private investments in the construction of railways and instructed the Ministry of Transport to make concrete proposals on the mechanism of return of investments till 1 March this year.President of the Union of International Road Carriers Maksat Saktaganov raised the issue of control in transport. As a proposal the idea to introduce currency control on road transport was voiced. Also, in his opinion, it is necessary to amend the legislation on the procedure for checking the authenticity of authorisation documents.Deputy Minister of Transport Maksat Kaliakparov reported on plans to introduce QR-codes in order to ensure transparency of permit documents to prevent forgeries.Director of Victory trans LLP Kuanyshbek Sadyrbayev initiated a number of changes in the rules of application of the permit system of road transport in Kazakhstan in international traffic to support domestic carriers. Marat Berkaliyev, President of the Association Automobile Convent of Kazakhstan, which unites 60 large and 40 small bus carriers of the country, made proposals regarding the approval of a set of measures for the development of passenger transport on road transport in Kazakhstan for 3 years, which will provide for full subsidisation of losses of carriers, fleet renewal, etc.Prime Minister supported the proposal and gave a corresponding instruction to the Ministry of Transport.General Director of International Airport Sary-Arka JSC Yerlan Ospanov proposed a number of measures for the development of air hubs and infrastructure of small aviation. Emphasis was placed on the need for systemic development of airports, increasing their economic sustainability.Prime Minister expressed support for the initiatives and emphasised the importance of creating competitive conditions for the work of airports. Additional meetings will be held on this issue for detailed elaboration and decision-making.Following the meeting the head of the Government noted that the development of transport infrastructure requires active cooperation between the state and business. The state budget cannot cover all the needs of the industry, so attracting private investment is a priority.Joint work of the Government and Atameken NCE on strengthening the interaction between business and government agencies for the effective development of the country's economy continues.Prime Minister Olzhas Bektenov chaired a meeting of the Board of Directors of National Management Holding Baiterek JSC. Head of the Government was informed about the results of investment and financial activities of the holding and its subsidiaries for 2024 in terms of support for domestic producers, provided within the existing instruments.Chairman of the Board of Baiterek NUH Rustam Karagoyshin reported on measures taken to finance the non-resource sector of the economy for a total amount of 4.09 trillion. Compared to the previous year, the volume of support increased by 52 per cent. A total of about 58,000 private companies and organisations that do not belong to quasi-public sector entities are covered. As a result of increased state support measures, more than 6,000 new jobs were created in the regions. Manufacturers produced products and provided services worth 7.3 trillion tenge. At the same time, the volume of exports increased by more than a third and reached over 1 trillion 046.1 billion tenge.Special attention was paid to the development of the country's agro-industrial complex. Thus, through the instruments of the holding and its structures, the agrarians purchased more than 10,500 units of agricultural machinery and equipment. In addition, a programme was launched to finance spring field and harvesting operations by attracting bonded loans on market terms. In order to develop a green economy, 3 projects in the field of energy for the amount of 14.5 billion tenge were supported.The Head of the Government was reported on measures taken to increase the share of in-country value in the procurement of goods, works and services of the group of companies of NUH Baiterek JSC. In works the share increased from 97.9% in 2023 to 99.9% in 2024, in services from 94% to 96%, in goods from 3% to 48%. The total volume of purchases by the group of companies of NUH Baiterek JSC last year amounted to 54 billion tenge. At the same time, 46 billion tenge, or 85%, was purchased from domestic producers of goods, works and services.Prime Minister held a meeting to review the implementation of the Head of State's instructions on attracting investment in the country's economy.The main goal is to accelerate the implementation of large investment projects and solution of systemic problems that hinder the improvement of investment climate in the country, as well as consideration of possible measures to improve the effectiveness of investment policy, creation of favourable conditions for investors and intensification of work on attracting capital.The information of the leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kazakh Invest on the pace of work and analysing the factors that affected the dynamics of investment activity was heard. In 2024 in Kazakhstan put into operation 230 investment projects for 1.85 trillion tenge. The work of the Investment Headquarters for the year allowed to eliminate 115 problematic issues of investors on projects totalling over $50 billion.An approach of targeting investors in priority niches where Kazakhstan has a competitive advantage with the potential for higher conversion and export opportunities is being implemented. TOP-10 companies have been identified as industry leaders for negotiations on specific prospects for co-operation and transition to the stage of active investment. Thus, the work is being restructured through the principle of order for investment taking into account the needs of the economy, competitive advantages of the regions and other factors.For example, productive work has been carried out with major Chinese agro-industrial companies. Fufeng Group in the near future plans to start construction of a $350 million plant for the production of sodium glutomate through deep processing of corn in Zhambyl region. Dalian Hesheng Holding Group will start construction and assembly works within the complex on deep processing of wheat in Akmola region for $650 mn this summer. Active work on ‘landing’ of projects, i.e. creation of favourable conditions, including accessible infrastructure and operative solution of administrative issues, continues with all companies.In addition, 20 strategic projects with a total investment volume of $12bn have been identified covering key sectors of the economy, including agro-industrial complex, energy, industry, production of construction materials and others.Among the presented projects, it is planned to conclude Investment Agreements on 14 projects this year, to start construction and installation works on 13 projects, and to start development of design and estimate documentation on 16 projects.Attention was also paid to the projects, agreements on the implementation of which were concluded within working visits, meetings and other events. Prime Minister dwelt in detail on investment projects, where the terms of their implementation had been disrupted. Akims of Almaty, Aktobe, Atyrau, Zhambyl regions, cities of Astana, Shymkent and ministers of health, trade were heard."To date, the measures taken to attract investment from the akimats do not reveal the opportunities of the regions, the economic potential is not sufficiently utilised. Work in this direction should be carried out at all levels of the vertical of local government, including regional akims," Head of the Government instructed.The Government approved approaches to the introduction of planned indicators of the work of regional akimats, ministries. A new National Digital Investment Platform will become an effective mechanism for monitoring and strengthening control over the implementation of projects, where today there is already data on 1159 projects. The data will be filled in jointly with Atameken NCE and verified on the ground by akimats.At the same time, during the meeting a number of problematic issues affecting the efficiency of work of government agencies and requiring action were noted.Among them are deficit and lack of prompt supply of infrastructure, complicated administrative procedures and delays in issuing permits, long terms of granting land plots. Necessary decisions have been taken on all issues. "The President noted at the enlarged meeting that attracting investment is a critical issue that requires more prompt work without excessive bureaucracy. State bodies and especially akimats need to manually control the implementation of projects. Akims and ministers should deal with this issue on a daily basis. This is the main task for today - it is necessary to promptly resolve the issues of investors," Olzhas Bektenov emphasised. 
The work in this direction is under special control of the Prime Minister.At the Government session chaired by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Alikhan Smailov, the results of socio-economic development and the execution of the republican budget for January-July 2022 were considered. The Minister of National Economy Alibek Kuantyrov, the Minister of Finance Yerulan Zhamaubayev and the Deputy Chairman of the National Bank Akylzhan Baimagambetov reported on the topic.According to the head of the Ministry of National Economy Kuantyrov, the growth rate of Kazakhstan's economy in January-July amounted to 3.3%. During the reporting period, high growth in the real sector, acceleration of growth in the services sector, maintaining a positive trade balance were observed by the main trends. Growth in the real sector amounted to 3.4%.Business activity in services accelerated to 2.5% (January-June was 2.1%). Among the industries, construction (up 8.6%), information and communication (up 6.5%), trade (up 6.2%), transportation and warehousing (up 5.6%), manufacturing (up 4.9%), agriculture (up 2.1%), and mining (up 1.0%) showed positive growth.The acceleration of the growth rate of investments in fixed assets up 4.5% (January-June was 2.6%). Investments grew in public administration and social security by 99.2%, education by 74.8%, trade by 26.4%, health by 26.3%, real estate by 19.9%, finance and insurance by 17.3% and construction by 14.8%.In regional context the best rates are noted in Shymkent (growth of 28.6%) and Almaty (24.3%) Cities as well as Almaty region (14.9%) and Zhetysu region (14.4%). Reduction was recorded in Ulytau (by 35.3%) and Abay regions (by 12.9%), as well as in Atyrau region (by 5.9%) and Karaganda region (by 1.9%).As for foreign trade, in the first six months of this year, trade turnover grew by 39.4% to $63.7 billion, including exports rose by 56.3% to $42.2 billion, with exports of processed goods increased by 33.5% to $12 billion. Imports of goods totaled $21.5 billion (growth of 14.8%). Overall, the positive trade balance was $20.8 billion.Manufacturing industry maintains a positive growth rate. During January-July of this year, production grew by 4.9%."Positive growth was recorded in 17 regions. The largest increase is noted in East Kazakhstan and Kostanay regions, in Abay region, as well as in the cities of Almaty and Shymkent. In these regions there was an increase in production of food products, petroleum products, construction materials, medicines, non-ferrous metals, tractors, trucks and cars," the Minister of National Economy said.According to him, there is a decrease in production in the region of Zhetysu (decrease by 7.5%), as well as in Pavlodar (3%) and Turkestan (0.2%) regions, mainly due to the reduction of production of flour, soft drinks, commercial concrete, uranium, metal, batteries, gasoline, diesel fuel, ferrochrome, unprocessed aluminum.As for the processing industries, there was a 7.7% increase in machinery production, including 19.6% increase in automobile production, 13.8% increase in computer, electronic and optical equipment production, 2.8% increase in food production, 9.1% increase in drinks production, 5.3% increase in plastic products, 3.0% increase in finished metal products, 10.6% increase in chemical industry products and 5.5% increase in clothes production.In the mining industry production increased by 1% (in January-June it was 1.9%). By sectors, production increased in mining industry by 18.7%, gas extraction by 2.2%, coal extraction by 1.3%, metallic ores by 0.9% and crude oil by 0.3%. In the extraction of other minerals there was a decrease of 6.6%.
During the period under review the volume of construction works increased by 8.6% (January-June to 9.2%). Positive growth was recorded in 17 regions. The greatest growth of construction and erection works has been noted in Almaty (by 29.6%) and Akmola (by 25.9%) regions, in Ulytau region (by 23.0%) as well as in Shymkent city (by 20.5%). Decrease in the volume of construction works has been observed in Mangystau region (decrease by 22,1%), and also in Abay region (by 18,9%) and Zhetysu region (by 10,8%).In January-July of this year, 7.7 mln. sq. m of housing was commissioned, which is 0.8% less than in the same period of 2021. Positive growth was recorded in 14 regions. The highest indicators are observed in Turkestan (growth by 20.3%), Pavlodar (by 16.6%) and Kostanay (by 13.2%) regions, as well as in Shymkent city (by 15.0%).Decrease is noted in Ulytau (decrease by 42.3%) and Zhetysu regions (by 3.9%), Mangistau region (by 20.7%), Atyrau region (by 8.7%), and also in Almaty city (by 13%) and Nur-Sultan city (by 0.7%).In agriculture gross output increased by 2.1% (January-June 1.4%). Positive growth of production in the sector was recorded in 16 regions. Mangystau (growth by 13.9%), North-Kazakhstan (by 5.5%) and Zhambyl (by 4.9%) regions showed the largest growth. Decrease is observed in Kostanay region (decrease by 7.2%).
The overall situation in the regional context by 7 economic indicators is as follows. By all indicators positive growth is observed in 3 regions - in Shymkent city, as well as Karaganda and North-Kazakhstan regions.For 6 indicators there is a growth in 8 regions. This includes the cities of Almaty and Nur-Sultan, as well as Almaty region, Kyzylorda region, East-Kazakhstan region, Pavlodar region, Akmola region and Aktobe region.By 5 indicators positive growth is observed in 6 regions - Kostanay, Atyrau, Turkestan, Mangystau, Zhambyl and West Kazakhstan regions.Positive growth by 4 indicators was recorded in Ulytau and Abay regions, by 3 indicators - in Zhetysu region.The head of the department suggested the central and local executive bodies to focus on the following measures:conducting systematic work to ensure the availability of food products and prevent excessive price increases for socially important food products;a comprehensive approach to supporting investments with all necessary preferences for investors in non-resource sectors;ensuring timely harvesting with effective use of available resources and tools;assistance in the uninterrupted supply of Kazakhstani exports with support for the search for new markets;effective provision of state support tools with the provision of quality interaction with the business.



